---
layout:          post
title:           "001 - In The Dark We See"
date:            2021-06-07 12:00:00 -0400
categories:      [episode] 
trailer:         false
tags:            [Episodes]
podcasts:        [Fathom]
voiced:          [Eva Graff, Joe Freeman, Dr. Sarah Klayton, Agent Blayne]
episode_title:   "In The Dark We See"
episode_number:  '001'
summary:         "'Something has been found at the bottom of Earth's ocean. An ancient artifact that can only be described as a giant door, inset into the ocean floor. It became known as the Vault. A gigantic enigma, buried and forgotten...nineteen thousand feet down.'"
content_flags:   [explicit language]
PodBean_url:       https://www.podbean.com/media/share/dir-mpswf-15466d57
formats: 
  PDF: https://www.derelictpodcast.com/_files/ugd/25a7b7_32534533e56a4ab3b713bed75c77eefe.pdf
  PDF (Large-Print): 
official:        true
wiki_url:        https://derelict-podcast.fandom.com/wiki/In_The_Dark_We_See
notes:           "Edited by [james-spooky]"
---

##### [THE SOUNDS OF AN UNDERWATER WORLD, RUSHING CURRENTS, SONAR PINGS, DISTANT WHALE SONG, THE DEPTHS...]

#### EVA (V.O.)

They say that in the dark, the eyes begin to see. And in the silence,  we begin to listen. Believe me, nowhere is it darker or quieter than this place. The bottom of the ocean. Nineteen thousand feet down... It's why I came here, after all, isn't it? Why I buried myself? The furthest away I could possibly get?

##### [NEW SOUNDS MIX IN, VOICES, STRANGE VOICES, FRIGHTENING ONES]

But, loss is an insidious thing. Whatever we try to escape, we inevitably bring with us. Even to the darkest, quietest places. 

##### [THE VOICES INTENSIFY, WHISPERING...]

And in the dark...we have no choice but to listen.

##### [DOZENS OF VOICES, HUNDREDS, THOUSANDS, GROWING IN POWER, IN NUMBER, COMING CLOSER, CLOSER, CLOSER...]

##### [EVA GRAFF WAKES FROM A DREAM, A BAD ONE, BREATHING HEAVILY]

#### EVA

Jesus...

##### [SHE KEEPS BREATHING, CALMING DOWN, GETTING CONTROL]

##### [A PING FROM A COMPUTER NEARBY]

#### KLAYTON

Dr. Graff?

##### [EVA SIGHS, ANNOYED]

#### EVA

Yes.

#### KLAYTON

Are you okay?

#### EVA

Fine.

#### KLAYTON

Your heart rate is quite elevated. Your blood oxygen levels are-

#### EVA

I'm fine, Klayton, thank you.

##### [A PAUSE FROM THE OTHER END OF THE INTERCOM]

#### KLAYTON

Dreams again?

##### [EVA SIGHS AGAIN]

#### EVA

Is that a crime?

#### KLAYTON

Would you like a sedative? It can really help you sleep.

#### EVA

No.

#### KLAYTON

Eva, according to the biologs, you haven't slept a regular cycle in more than a month. 

#### EVA

How many times do I have to say I'm fine?

##### [ANOTHER PAUSE]

#### KLAYTON

Logs don't lie, Eva. 

#### EVA

And they don't tell the whole story either, Sarah. What's up with the repairs?

#### KLAYTON

Well, you'd have to ask Freeman for the whole picture, but last I heard, it was going well. They have most the supports for Fathom West patched, working on North now. I know why you're asking. I haven't heard if access to the Relay's back up or not. 

#### EVA

Hopefully not much longer... 

#### KLAYTON

Couple of weird things, though. 

#### EVA

What?

#### KLAYTON

Well, they finally got the mainframe room open. With Mack acting the way he's been, everyone felt there must have been damage to his systems from the explosion. Flooding or something.

#### EVA

There wasn't?

#### KLAYTON

Not any that Emerson could find. No water present in the room, main frame itself was undamaged. They're going over it now, though.

#### EVA

Well... No one knows Mack like Emerson. 

#### KLAYTON

That's the other thing. No one knows where Emerson _is_.

#### EVA

What do you mean, no one knows?

#### KLAYTON

Mack's personnel tracking is down now, and no one can raise her on comms. 

##### [EVA SIGHS IN FRUSTRATION]

She may be outside, checking the capsule's exterior. With all the Eddy activity, though...

#### EVA

People don't just disappear, especially down here, and Emerson's sort of aloof anyway. She'll show up at lunch. Sarah, I need to get up now. 

#### KLAYTON

I still think sedatives-

#### EVA

Thank you, Doctor.

##### [ANOTHER PING AS EVA CLOSES THE CONNECTION]
##### [SHE SIGHS AGAIN, BREATHES DEEPLY]

_Jesus..._

##### [A DIFFERENT SOUNDING PING]

#### MACK

Good morning, Dr. Graff.

#### EVA

Good morning, Mack. Was just talking about you. Heard Emerson is poking around in your brain.

#### MACK

Ms. Emerson is attempting to determine the cause of my minor malfunctions. My own diagnostics continue to show no errors or latency.

#### EVA

Well, something's up, yesterday you told me it was snowing in Chicago. In _June_.

#### MACK

It is puzzling. I was extensively stress tested before being approved for deployment. An explosion, such as the one Fathom base experienced last week, should not have caused any permanent damage. Will you be retuning to sleep, Dr. Graff?

#### EVA

_[tired]_ No. No, I don't think so.

#### MACK

I'll prepare your coffee. 

##### [THE AUTOMATED BUTLER BEGINS WORKING NEARBY]

You have two new voicemails, if you would like them.

#### EVA

Who's the first from?

#### MACK

The first voicemail is from your wife, Dr. Graff.

#### EVA

She's not my- Play it, please, Mack.

#### MACK

Playing message from Angela Graff. Timestamped June seventeenth, eleven forty five, PM.

#### ANGELA

_Hi..._

_Don't know why I do this, you never respond. It's like talking to a ghost. Or...sending messages to a ghost, or... Christ, Eva, we haven't spoken in two months. I at least expected something yesterday. Yesterday of all days. _

_You know, you act like you're the only one who feels anything. Or, I don't know, like you're the only one who has a right to feel anything. It's really selfish, you know that? It's really- I just expected something, is all._

_[low]__ Listen, I'm not going to send these anymore, Eva. I... I took a commission off world. Colony assignment. It's not with the Corporation, you don't have to worry about that, it's my own thing. It's...what I've wanted to do for a long time, you know what. I just... Eva, I waited as long as I could, I guess. But I can see you're not coming back. I don't understand it, I don't know why we couldn't be there for each other, go through this together, I don't..._

_I miss her too... Maybe even just as much as you._

##### [SHE SIGHS]

_I'm sorry... For that. I'm sorry I called you selfish, too, I... I'm just sorry. I'm sorry every way I can be sorry. I love you, Eva. Always. _

##### [THERE IS A CLICK AS THE MESSAGE ENDS]
##### [EVA BREATHES OUT WITH EMOTION, STAYS STILL]

#### MACK

Would you like to respond to the message, Dr. Graff?

##### [EVA DOESN'T RESPOND, JUST SITS THERE, BREATHING]

Would you like to respond to the-

#### EVA

_[hoarse, quiet]_ Delete it. 

#### MACK

Are you certain, Dr. Graff?

#### EVA

_Delete it._

##### [A CONFIRMATION TONE]

#### MACK

Message deleted. Would you like to hear your second voice-?

##### [THE INTERCOM PINGS AGAIN BEFORE EVA CAN ANSWER]

#### FREEMAN

Eva, I need you to wake up and get over to Hyroponics.

#### EVA

_[annoyed]_ Good morning to you too, Joe.

#### FREEMAN

Is it? ISD's here. Wants to meet with us. 

#### EVA

Already? I thought his sub wasn't scheduled until tomorrow night.

#### FREEMAN

Well, I guess he decided to accelerate the schedule. I don't think that's a good sign. Do you?

#### EVA

Can it wait? I'm just not in a-

#### FREEMAN

It's Internal Security, Eva, no it can't wait. I'd like to know what you plan to say, though.

##### [EVA LAUGHS SARDONICALLY]

#### EVA

Yeah, I bet you would...

#### FREEMAN

Eva, I swear to God, if you try to pin this on me...

#### EVA

Fathom is Joe? You _your_ base, isn't it, _are_ the commander?

#### FREEMAN

Edgars was science team, not command. 

#### EVA

And it was your security protocols he overrode. Your _explosives_ he stole.

#### FREEMAN

Look, there's plenty of blame to go around, that's how they're gonna look at it. I just think... I just think if we put our heads together on this, we can come out of it with our jobs still intact.

#### EVA

Oh, God, Joe, neither one of us tried to blow up the damn base, did we? The only one on the chopping block is Edgars. M-D's put way too much money into this _travesty_ to pull either of us out now. 

#### FREEMAN

Really? Then why are they ordering what's left of the science team back to the surface?   

#### EVA

Wait, what? They can't do that. We're already a skeleton crew, I have half the people I need to-

#### FREEMAN

They can and they did. Nonessentials, too. Indefinitely. We started mothballing rovers and dive suits last night, and Analytics just left on a sub fifteen minutes ago. Where have you _been_?

#### EVA

Joe, that... That doesn't make any sense. There has to be an explanation. There-

#### FREEMAN

Yeah, there's an explanation. You've been down here eleven months, and that _thing_ out there is no closer to being open than the day it was found. Add to that, you got people on _your_ team running around trying to blow up the place. A place that, yes, they _have_ sunk a lot of money into. What did you _think_ was going to happen, Eva? What did you _think_ they were going to do?

##### [EVA'S BREATHING IS RAGGED NOW]

#### EVA

I don't know what to... I'll fix it. I'll fix this. 

#### FREEMAN

I'm holding my breath, Dr. Graff. 

Hydroponics. ASAP.

##### [THE COMMUNICATION DISCONNECTS HARSHLY]

#### EVA

Shit. Shit, shit, _shit_.

##### [THE SOUNDS OF HER GETTING OUT OF BED]
##### [HER FOOTSTEPS SOUNDS AS IF SHE'S PACING, HER BREATHING IS RAGGED]

Get a grip.

##### [SHE TYPES ON THE COMPUTER]

Get a _grip_...

#### FREEMAN

#### EVA

#### FREEMAN

#### EVA
























